[ music ]
So let's summarize what we've discussed in the last couple of lectures
in case you're self confused.
First we discussed actions. And actions are used to enable developers to modify your code without
actually editing your files.
So for example you mentioned that if you want to allow the other developers to add some code in this
after the pagination, you can create an action and call do_action() and give it a name.
So this way other developers can hook into this part of the code and add some code. And this is done
by calling a function called add_action() and attaching or registering a function that is hooked. And we've seen
how to do that in the last lecture.
We've also seen that you can pass arguments to actions.
So for example WordPress has an action called "pre_get_posts" and the function used to register an action
get passed the current instance of the WP_Query. And we then  discussed filters. And the difference between actions
and filters is that, you know, in actions you allow the other person to write some code at some point
in the in your code.
So here we allow the other developers to write code in this part of the code. And filters however, you allow other
developers to modify just something you output in your theme. So get an input,
you filter it and you return it.
You're not allowed to do further than that.
So in our case we were echoing this string escaped and translated and we wanted to allow other developers
to filter it.
Right?
So we called apply_filters() and give it a name.
And the thing that we want to filter and then using the add_filter() function. We add a function to the filter
name that we gave.
And then the function we have the thing that we want to filter as an argument. So we can modify it and
return it. Or we can return a completely new string as we did here.
So that's mainly the difference between filters and actions.
And then we mentioned that we have a problem that we, all right we are allowing other developers to interact
with our theme but to do that they will have to modify functions.php to hook into our actions and
filters.
So modifying the function.php file is actually modifying the theme.
And if a theme gets in updates, everything they've written here will be gone.
And we mentioned that the solution to this is child themes.
So child themes are themes that inherits all the functionality of the parent theme but it can modify it
or add to it.
And the main advantage to child themes is as we've been mentioning you can modify the parent theme while
allowing them to be updated without destroying your changes.
So let's create a child theme. It's a very simple procedure.
So in my themes folder inside wp-contents, the same folder where we have our main theme, let's create, let's copy
the theme names and create a new folder. And you should call it the same name, the same parent's theme name
and then "-child".
And then I'm gonna add this folder to our
VS Code project. So add folder to WordPress. And then this one.
So we now have the two folders here. We can browse through them.
So in the  child theme let's create a new file. And this will be style.css. Similar to the parent
theme when we have the information in the style.css, we can actually copy it and paste it in the child themes
style.css.
So of course in production your theme will be called "firsttheme". So you can call this "firsttheme child".
And you can change these.
But what's important is now we should add a new field called "Template". And this should be your parents
theme name, which is "firsttheme". And you should also change the text domain to something unique.
So we can call it "firsttheme-child".
And I think that's it. We can save it. And then let's go to the wp-admin.
Login and let's actually remove this pink color.
It's kind of annoying.
So source, assets and admin.
Great. So now go to Appearance and Themes and the color's still cached,  and we'll find our child theme here.
So activate it.
And if you find your CSS isn't changing
you can, in Chrome, you can just to enable and disable this. And here we go.
So now we have our child theme activated.
So our website will look exactly the same. Because we still have the functionality of our parent theme.
But now we can add to it or modify it in our child theme.
So let's go to our child theme folder and our problem that we wanted to have these functions in a child
theme.
Right?
So let's copy them, all the filters and the actions.
And we can simply create a new file in the child theme called functions.php. And this will not override
your original function.php file in the parent theme. It will just extend it. So let's open PHP
and paste.
So let's save and see if our actions and filters are still. And here go. Our actions and the filters is working
because you have two post. We have three posts because this is a sticky post in case you're wondering. If you
go to the second page
I still have two posts.
So we've done it.
We've created the child theme and we have our functions.php now that can extend our original functions.
So what we can also do with child themes, we can override template files.
So if we create a new file called index.php. Sorry.
This file will actually override completely the original file.
So now if we refresh, we will have a blank file.
So let's delete this and this will apply to any template file in your theme.
You can override it with a child theme.
So let's delete this before now.
Another thing I want to point out in child themes is when your reference a file in your theme.
So let's say we want to enqueue a new style sheet in our child theme.
So we create a new file. Let's call it bundle.css and let's add a background to the body.
And let's use our favorite color.
So it's exactly the same thing
when we enqueue the CSS in our parent theme. Only a difference that we'll see.
So "wp_enqueue_scripts".
So this is an action.
And we just need to give it a function.
So let's call it "firsttheme_child_scripts".
And let's create the function.
And like we did in the parent theme "wp_enqueue_style".
And the "firsttheme-child-styles". So here when we wanted to reference the file, we use "get_ template
"get_template_directory_uri",
right?
So "get_template_directory_uri()" will always reference the parent theme even if you use it in a child
theme.
So to reference a file inside the child theme, we use "get_stylesheet_directory_uri()".
So this will always reference the active theme even if it's a child theme.
"get_template_directory_uri" however will always reference the parent theme even if you use it in a child
theme.
So this is important.
So our path is simply "/styles.css".
"/styles.css".
So next we need to add our dependencies and media. So the media is "all".
And we also have the version.
So let' say "1.0.
0".
And the dependencies, we can actually add an array of dependencies. So we can add this file as a dependency
to our parent file, to our parent styles.
So the handle for our parent stylesheet was "_themename-stylesheet" which in production of course
will be your theme name "-stylesheet".
But in order to work we'll use the theme name placeholder.
So we can make the child styles depend on the parent styles.
So this way it will be enqueued after it in order to override it.
If we don't do that, if we leave it as an empty array, the functions.php file for the child theme run first.
So probably you'll have your child theme enqueued first and it will be overridden by the parent theme.
So adding this dependency, we will ensure it's added after the parent stylesheet.
So let's save this. And see what happens. So
let's view the source.
So looks like we've done something wrong.
Ok, ok.
So we'll call this "/bundle.css" not "styles".  It should work I think.
Ok, so I already discover that I have a typo here.
Sorry for that.
And it should work now.
And as you can see in the source, we can see that we have our "_themename-stylesheet" and our "firsttheme-
child-styles" enqueued after it.
So this's how we enqueue a stylesheet
in our child theme to override our parent's stylesheet. So last thing I want to mention in child themes for
now is as I mentioned the functions.php of the child theme runs before the functions.php of
the parent theme.
So if we for example,
let's open the helpers functions. So let's say we want to override this function in our child theme.
So let's create a function with the same name. And I'll just make it echo some string here.
So what will happen now is of course this will give us an error because we are duplicating the function's
name.
Let's remove the pink background.
So the solution to this if you want to allow child themes to override your parent theme functions,
you can in your functions in the parent theme
so in the helpers folder you can check first if function exists.
So "if( function_exists() )" and the name of the function.
Or actually if function does not exist, if it does not exist or if it's not overridden by a child themes
so define it.
If it already exists, if it's already defined by child theme so don't do anything.
So this way we will have the, you know, the meta string here is now the child theme function.
So we can do this if you want to allow child themes to override your functions.
So I think that's it for child themes for now. During the course we will get back to this child theme and see
what other things we can do.
So see you in the next section.